Hello everyone and welcome to this lecture on selection's swords.
So in this lecture we'll get an explanation of selection's soar and get a look at some visualizations
of selection sort.
And then next lecture will actually implement it using Python.
So the selection of saur improves on the bubble sort by making only one exchange for every pass through
the list.
And in order to do this a selection of saur looks for the largest value as it makes a pass and after
completing the pass places in its proper location.
So as with the bubble sort.
After the first pass the largest item is in the correct place.
And then after a second pass the next largest correct place.
So this process continues and then only requires and minus one passes for a list or array and items
since that final item will be placed after that and minus one Istor if pass.
So let's go ahead and see a figure that shows the entire sorting process.
So on each pass the largest remaining item is selected and then placed into its proper location.
So in this implementation we're looking at the largest in other implementations for selection sort.
You can also look at the minimum.
So the penny on how you actually want to program your algorithm you can either keep track of the largest
elements or the minimum elements the smallest ones.
So in this case if we decide to track the largest element we look at her array.
Notice that 93 is the largest So he placed it at the end.
Then the next largest 77.
So he place it and minus one to the end then 55 is the largest.
So we place it where it goes.
Four is in the next largest place behind 55 44.
It's largest but it actually stays in place sort of at its correct location right after 54.
And this process keeps happening until your list is sorted.
So basically keeping track of in this case your largest elements and then pushing it all the way to
the end and you also have a tracker for where it should go in the array.
OK.
And you're able to do this now and end of minus one passes.
You could have also kept track of the minimum and done this in the reverse instead of placing items
or elements at the end of the array you placed them at the beginning.
So you would start with in this case 17 is the minimum and push all the way to the left and then get
20 and then push it all the way to left etc. etc..
So in the visualisations we're going to see we're going to think about it that way.
How you would implement this using a minimum tracker.
OK.
So let's go ahead and look at some visualizations.
So I jumped to the Jupiter notebook and there is a sorting and searching folder it's called implementation
of selection sort.
There's no book we're actually going to see the next lecture.
When we implement this code for a selection sort.
Here are some resources for review.
And in this case we can go in and check out the visual algo or the selection sort animation.
Let's go in and do the selection sorts animation.
So we get started on that first step we're going to grab the minimum element which was 1 and then place
it at index zero.
And now we're going to go along and look for that next elements.
That's a minimum.
And it was two.
So it gets switched with that index one.
Now we're indexed to have Element 14.
So we're looking for the next smallest number which in this case will be the index for which is three
and then we're going to do the swap that way.
Now we're at index three with elements 12 and we're looking for the next item to put in which will be
four.
So he swapped that way.
So notice where 12 and that up here.
So now we have an index for 14.
Next element is going to be five here.
Index 11.
And you can do the swap that way.
Next index six.
Where is it going to be the next is going to be at 7 7 or 10 here one up here at this index and you
can basically keep running this and do the swaps yourself.
And there you go.
Now you have an entire sorted array.
So this was using the swapping with the minimum.
So if you want to see this almost like in slow motion I encourage you to come and check up visual Alwa
dot net Most do that as a homework assignment.
You can really get a visual.
So let's go good and sort this.
Actually it's already sort of it's it's go and create a new one random go OK.
And then we'll go sort's go and take a look at what's happening here.
So we're going to check if all these numbers here are smaller than the current minimums or current minimum
is three.
So we start on the left we're looking for a current minimum.
There it is.
It's two.
So we're going to push it as the new minimum check the other numbers if they're smaller than the current
minimum.
None of them are not so swap two with three here.
So notice how that swap took place.
So now our current minimum is 38 and it's going to be keep getting reset against all the numbers so
we keep going along.
And now we're looking for that next minimum which will actually end up being three.
The number we just swapped here now three is the current minimum.
And you can follow along here with the pseudo code and the status bar which is actually telling you
what's going on.
And then the swap occurs.
So if we push to speed a little faster you'll notice the swaps taking place.
So it's checking against the minimums and then pushing them to where they belong.
All right.
So unlike the bubble sort it's not doing that pair of a swopping you'll notice way fewer swaps in a
bubble sort.
It was doing swaps all along.
And here we're just checking for the new minimums versus the current minimums.
In the example that I showed you in that presentation we were actually looking for the largest.
So I wanted to be aware that you could implement this both ways either by checking for the minimums
or for the largest and then pushing things you know to left or to the right and doing those swaps the
pending on whether you're checking for maximums or minimums.
All right.
So that list is sorted.
Let's go to implement this.
So we get a better understanding of how selection sort works.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture